---
layout: default
---

Statistical mechanics is concerned with describing the average properties of systems consisting of many particles. Examples of such systems are the atoms making up a bar magnet, the water molecules in a glass of water, or virtually any other instance of matter around us. Matter can arrange itself in various structures with fundamentally different properties. We call these distinct states of matter phases. When matter changes from one phase to another, we say it undergoes a phase transition.

Physics has made great strides in understanding these transitions, mainly by studying very simple models, because as it turns out, microscopic details do not matter close to a phase transition. Very complex models may show the same universal behaviour as simple ones.

Computers have been used study these models from the moment they were invented. As an example, which is totally unrelated to this thesis method-wise, but captures the idea of the whole enterprise, the interested reader may consider the following. Suppose we want to model what happens when we pour water on top of some porous material, say some sort of soil. Will the water be able to make its way through to the bottom? One way to do this is to simplify the material to a square lattice with bonds between neighbouring vertices (actually, we are now in two dimensions instead of three, but we just want to get an idea, remember?) We now randomly assign to each bond the status "open: lets through liquid" with probability p, or the status "closed" with probability 1 - p. The probability p is the parameter that models the porosity of the material. We can now ask, for what probability p can the liquid reach the bottom? (Or in the language of our model, when does an "open path" stretch from top to bottom?) We are, of course, primarily interested in very large lattices.

You can try to find out with the help of your computer. Just draw many randomly chosen lattice configurations and see if an open path forms. You will see that for small p, this almost never happens (using large enough lattices). For high p, this happens almost without exception. We have encountered a phase transition! At some point p, the system goes from being non-permeable to permeable. If you stick with your research, you might get the impression that this point is, in fact, p = 1/2. Could there be a reason for this?

It turns out that the percolating cluster (the one that stretches from top to bottom) behaves very peculiarly around this point, and you can learn many things directly applicable to other physical models such as gases or magnets if you look closely enough.
